Update ReaR documentation (#1871)
bareos/bareos: docs/manuals/source/Appendix/DisasterRecoveryUsingBareos.rst

Installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^

For Bareos >= 22, ReaR > 2.7 is required.
If ReaR > 2.7 is not part of your distribution, check the `download section on the
ReaR website <https://relax-and-recover.org/download/>`_.
The current (2024) stable release of ReaR is 2.7,
therefore until a newer version is released,
a ReaR snapshot package must be used,
see :ref:`section-rear-snapshot-package-installation`.

Configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

For ReaR to work with Bareos, the following packages must be installed:

* **rear** > 2.7 (currently only via a ReaR snapshot package)
* **bareos-fd**
* **bareos-bconsole**

> Make sure you have a working |fd| configuration on the system and already did a backup of all disks you want to restore (the fileset have to include all data required to fully restore the system. A good starting point is :config:option:`dir/fileset = LinuxAll`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure you have a working |fd| configuration on the system and already did a backup of all disks you want to restore (the fileset has to include all data required to fully restore the system. A good starting point is :config:option:`dir/fileset = LinuxAll`).
```

You also need the |bconsole| installed and configured,
so that it can connect to the |dir|.
Ideally the |bconsole| is configured in a way that it can only access this client,
see :ref:`section-named-console-for-rear`.

> To configure the Bareos backend, ReaR uses the variables

Reviewer 2: Not sure if you have this, but it might be worth explaining that the fileset used for ReaR should be a full backup of all files and not a partial data-only backup.

Author: This has only be mentioned in the introduction, but making it more explicit is probably better. Added it now.

   In this configuration it will only create the rescue ISO
   (same as the :command:`rear mkrescue` command).

.. note::

>    The rescue image is created from the running system.

Reviewer 2: Maybe add the info that it also contains the Bareos client and related configuration to perform the restore?

Author: added.

The ReaR Bareos backend also works in ReaRs **Automatic Recover** mode,
selectable at boot,
which recreates the system without manual interaction.

Advanced ReaR Bareos Backend Configuration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. _section-rear-snapshot-package-installation:

Installing a ReaR Snapshot Package
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The current (2024) stable release of ReaR is 2.7,
which does not support Bareos > 22.
Therefore until a newer version is released,
a ReaR snapshot package must be used:

* Download the ZIP file that best matches your distribution from https://github.com/rear/rear/releases/tag/snapshot
* Unpack the ZIP file and install the package on the client.

For details, refer to https://relax-and-recover.org/download/

.. _section-named-console-for-rear:

Configure a Named Console for ReaR
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

The default :command:`bconsole` configuration on the |dir| offers full access to the |dir|.
This is normally not wanted from a client systems.

Instead you configure a :config:option:`dir/console` for every Bareos client using ReaR,
limiting the access to only one system and the required console commands:

> .. code-block:: bareosconfig

Reviewer 2: This feels very cumbersome if you have lots of clients... If there is a way to make this more simple and still secure then maybe would be good to mention it.

Author: There are two ways we address this:

1. when #1875 get merged, it still require one console per client, but using a rear profile, in can be reduced to just a few settings
2. we like to add a mode, where the rescue image only contain the bareos-fd, not the bconsole. This got the limitation, that the restore must be triggered from the server, but simplifies the client a lot. Also using bconsole on the server is the typical use-case.

Author: Once this is done, we can extend the documentation to reflect that.

   :caption: :file:`bareos-dir.d/console/bareosclient-console.conf`

   Console {
      # individual per client
      Name = "bareosclient-console"
      Password = "secret"
      Client ACL = "bareosclient-fd"

      # identical for all clients
      Description = "Restricted console used by ReaR"
      Command ACL = "."
      Command ACL = ".api"
      Command ACL = ".client"
      Command ACL = ".clients"
      Command ACL = ".fileset"
      Command ACL = ".filesets"
      Command ACL = ".help"
      Command ACL = ".jobs"
      Command ACL = ".jobstatus"
      Command ACL = ".status"
      Command ACL = "exit"
      Command ACL = "help"
      Command ACL = "list"
      Command ACL = "llist"
      Command ACL = "restore"
      Command ACL = "show"
      Command ACL = "status"
      Command ACL = "version"
      Command ACL = "wait"
      Catalog ACL = *all*
      FileSet ACL = *all*
      Job ACL = *all*
      Plugin Options ACL = *all*
      Pool ACL = *all*
      Schedule ACL = *all*
      Storage ACL = *all*
      Where ACL = *all*

>    }

Author: This console definition can be simplified, as soon as https://github.com/bareos/bareos/pull/1875 is merged.

Create the file on the |dir| and :bcommand:`reload` the configuration.
Of course a individual password should be used.

The corresponding :file:`/etc/bareos/bconsole.conf` on the ReaR client will look like this.

.. code-block:: bareosconfig
   :caption: :file:`/etc/bareos/bconsole.conf`

   Director {
      Name = "bareos-dir"
      Address = "bareos.example.com"
      Password = ""
   }

   Console {
      Name = "bareosclient-console"

>       Password = "secret"

Reviewer 2: Maybe hint that this needs to be protected with filesystem ACL and that ReaR will take it along and that the rescue image should be treated as a credential?

Author: done

So wrapping the creation of a new rescue image by a script to limit the number of times it get regenerated often makes sense.
Limitations could be made based on the backup level or the age of the existing rescue image,
like implemented in the following script with the corresponding :config:option:`dir/job` configuration:

.. code-block:: sh
   :caption: :file:`/usr/local/sbin/update-rear-rescue.sh`

   #!/bin/bash

   set -e
   set -u

   backuplevel="${1:-}"

   REAR_OUTPUT_PATH=/var/lib/rear/output/

   if [ "$backuplevel" = "Full" ]; then
      echo "backup level = $backuplevel: recreating rescue image"
   else
      days=7
      current_rescue_images=( $( find "$REAR_OUTPUT_PATH" -name "rear-*" -mtime -$days ) )
      if  [ ${#current_rescue_images[@]} -gt 0 ]; then
         echo "SKIPPING 'rear mkrescue', as images newer than $days days exists: ${current_rescue_images[@]}"
         exit 0
      else
         echo "no current rescue image found. recreating it"
      fi
   fi

   rear mkrescue
   exit $?

.. code-block:: bareosconfig

   Job {
      ...
      Run Script {
         Runs When = Before
         Runs On Client = yes

>          Command = "/usr/local/sbin/update-rear-rescue.sh %l"

Reviewer 2: Maybe mention that the admin needs to put the file there himself, or is this distributed by Bareos automatically?

Author: done

      Command ACL = "show"
      Command ACL = "status"
      Command ACL = "version"
      Command ACL = "wait"
      Catalog ACL = *all*
      FileSet ACL = *all*
      Job ACL = *all*
      Plugin Options ACL = *all*
      Pool ACL = *all*
      Schedule ACL = *all*
      Storage ACL = *all*
      Where ACL = *all*
   }

Create the file on the |dir| and :bcommand:`reload` the configuration.
Of course a individual password should be used.

The corresponding :file:`/etc/bareos/bconsole.conf` on the ReaR client will look like this.

.. code-block:: bareosconfig
   :caption: :file:`/etc/bareos/bconsole.conf`

   Director {
      Name = "bareos-dir"
      Address = "bareos.example.com"
      Password = ""
   }

   Console {
      Name = "bareosclient-console"
      Password = "secret"
   }

* :config:option:`console/director/Address`: must be set to the DNS name or IP address of the |dir|.
* :config:option:`console/director/Password`: will be ignored and can be empty.
* :config:option:`console/console/Name`: must correspond to :config:option:`dir/console/Name`.
* :config:option:`console/console/Password`: must correspond to :config:option:`dir/console/Password`.

> For more detail, refer to :ref:`section-named-console`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details, see :ref:`section-named-console`.
```

the :command:`bconsole` command would be this:

.. code-block:: bconsole
   :caption: restore the a ReaR Rescue Image to another system

   *<input>restore client=bareosclient-fd fileset=LinuxAll current fileregex=/var/lib/rear/output/rear-.* restoreclient=client_with_cd_burner-fd</input>

or if your prefer:

.. code-block:: bconsole
   :caption: restore the a ReaR Rescue Image to another system and adapt the path

   *<input>restore client=bareosclient-fd fileset=LinuxAll current fileregex=/var/lib/rear/output/rear-.* restoreclient=client_with_cd_burner-fd regexwhere=!/var/lib/rear/output/!/tmp/rear-rescue-images/!</input>

Make sure to test this thoroughly, especially if you are using :ref:`DataEncryption`,
as restoring to another system needs special preparations.

.. _section-rear-create-rescue-image-regularly:

Update ReaR Rescue Image Regularly
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

While a ReaR Rescue Image is quite flexible,
it works best if it matches the current configuration of your system.
Any configuration change (hardware, software or environment/network)
can require an updated rescue image.

> This can be automatic using different methods, besides others:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be automated using various methods, among others:
```

* periodically (cron)
* on system restart (as a configuration change, like a new kernel version, often requires a reboot)
* Bareos backup job

Doing this via Bareos backup job has two advantages:

#. the rescue image corresponds perfectly to your backup
#. your backup report immediately tells if somethings went wrong with your backup or your restore image.

However, the size of a rescue image is around 200 MB.
Adding this to a daily incremental backup is often unnecessary.

> So wrapping the creation of a new rescue image by a script to limit the number of times it get regenerated often makes sense.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So it often makes sense to wrap the creation of a new rescue image by a script to limit the number of times it gets regenerated.
```
